And the moon, were she earthly,no nobler.
Whither do you follow your eyesso fast?
Honorable Menenius, my boyMarcius approaches.
For the love of Juno, let's go.
Marcius coming home?
Ay, worthy Menenius, and withmost prosperous approbation.
Take my cap, Jupiter, and Ithank thee.
Marcius coming home!
Nay, 'tis true.
Is he not wounded?
He was wont to come homewounded.
O, no, no, no.
O, he is wounded.
I thank the gods for it.
So do I too, and it be not toomuch,
brings a victory in his pocket?
The wounds become him.
On's brows, Menenius,
he comes the third time homewith the oaken garland.
Has he disciplined Aufidiussoundly?
Titus Lartius writes they foughttogether,
but Aufidius got off.
And 'twas time for him too, I'llwarrant him that.
And he had stayed by him,
I would not be so fidiused forall the chests in Corioli
and the gold that's in them.
Is the senate possessed of this?
Good ladies, let's go.
Yes, yes, yes.
The senate has letters from thegeneral
in which he gives my son thewhole name of the war.
He has in this action outdonehis former deeds doubly.
In troth, there's wondrousthings spoke of him.
Wondrous.
Ay, I warrant you,
and not without his truepurchasing.
The gods grant them true.
True.
Pow, wow.
True; I'll be sworn they aretrue.
Where is he wounded?
In the shoulder and in the leftarm.
There will be large cicatricesto show the people
when he shall stand for hisplace.
He received in the repulse ofTarquin
seven hurts in the body.
One in the neck; two in thethigh.
That's nine that I know.
He had, before this lastexpedition,
25 wounds upon him.
Now it is 27.
Every gash an enemy's grave.
Hark, the trumpets.
These are the ushers of Marcius.
Before him he carries noise, andbehind him he leaves tears.
Death, that dark spirit, in hisnervy arm doth lie,
which, being advanced, declines,and then men die.
Know, Rome, that all alone
Marcius did fight within Corioligates,
where he hath won, with fame, aname to Caius Marcius.
These in honor followsCoriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renownedCoriolanus.
No more of this.
It does offend my heart.
Pray now, no more.
Look, sir, your mother.
O, you have, I know, petitionedall the gods for my prosperity.
Nay, my good soldier, up.
My gentle Marcius,
worthy Caius,
and by deed-achieving honornewly namedó
What is it?
Coriolanus must I call thee?
But O, thy wife.
My gracious silence,
hail.
Wouldst thou have laughed had Icome coffined home,
that weepest to see me triumph?
Ah, my dear, such eyes thewidows in Corioli wear,
and mothers that lack sons.
Now, the gods crown thee.
And live you yet?
O, sweet lady, pardon.
I know not where to turn.
O, welcome home.
Welcome, General.
And you're welcome all.
100,000 welcomes.
I could weep, and I could laugh.
I am light and heavy.
Welcome.
The good patricians must bevisited,
from whom I have received notonly greetings,
but with them change of honors.
I have lived to see inherited myvery wishes
and the buildings of my fancy.
Only there's one thing wanting,
which I doubt not but our Romewill cast upon thee.
Know, good mother, I had ratherbe their servant in my way
than sway with them in theirs.
On the sudden, I warrant himconsul.
Then our office may, during hispower, go sleep.
He cannot temperately transporthis honors
from where he should begin andend,
but will lose those he hath won.
In that, there's comfort.
Doubt not the commoners, withwhom we stand,
but they upon their ancientmalice
will forget with the least causethese his new honors,
which that he will give them
make I as little question as heis proud to do it.
I heard him swear, were he tostand for consul,
never would he appear in themarketplace,
nor on him put the naplessvesture of humility,
nor showing, as the manner is,
his wounds to the people, begtheir stinking breaths.
'Tis right.
It was his word.
O, he would miss it rather thancarry it
but by the suit of the gentry tohim
and the desire of the nobles.
I wish no better than have himhold that purpose
and to put it in execution.
'Tis most like he will.
It shall be to him then as ourgood wills a sure destruction.
So it must fall out to him
or our authorities for an end.
We must suggest to the people
in what hatred he still hathheld them,
that to his power he would havemade them mules,
silenced their pleaders
and dispropertied theirfreedoms,
holding them, in human actionand capacity,
of no more soul nor fitness forthe world than...
Camels in the war?
Camels in the war
who have their provand only forbearing burdens
and sore blows for sinking underthem.
This, as you say, suggested atsome time
when his soaring insolence shalltouch the peopleó
which time shall not want, if hebe put upon it,
and that's as easy as to setdogs on sheepó
will be his fire to kindle theirdry stubble,
and their blaze shall darken himforever.
What's the matter?
You are sent for to the capitol.
'Tis thought that Marcius shallbe consul.
I have seen the dumb men throngto see him
and the blind to hear him speak.
Matrons flung gloves,
ladies and maids their scarfsand handkerchiefs
upon him as he passed.
The nobles bended as to Jove'sstatue,
and the commons made a showerand thunder
with their caps and shouts.
I never saw the like.
Having determined of the Volscesand to send for Titus Lartius,
it remains, as the main point inthis our after-meeting,
to gratify his noble service
that hath thus stood for hiscountry.
Therefore, please you, mostreverend and grave elders,
to desire the present consul,
and last general in ourwell-found successes,
to report a little of the worthywork performed
by Caius Marcius Coriolanus,
whom we met here both to thank
and to remember with honors likehimself.
Speak, good Cominius.
Leave nothing out for length,
and make us think rather ourstate's defective
for requital than we to stretchit out.
Masters of the people, we dorequest your kindest ears,
and after, your loving motiontoward the common body
to yield what passes here.
We are convented upon a pleasingtreaty
and have hearts inclinable
to honor and advance the themeof our assembly.
Which the rather we shall beblessed to do,
if he remember a kinder value ofthe people
than he hath hereto prized themat.
That's off; that's off.
I would you rather had beensilent.
Please you to hear Cominiusspeak?
Most willingly, but yet mycaution was more pertinent
than the rebuke you give it.
He loves your people
but tie him not to be theirbedfellow.
Worthy Cominius, speak.
Nay, keep your place.
Sit, Coriolanus;
never shame to hear what youhave nobly done.
Your honor's pardon.
I'd rather have my wounds toheal again
than hear say how I got them.
Sir, I hope my words disbenchedyou not.
No, sir.
Yet oft, when blows have made mestay,
I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurtnot.
But your people, I love them asthey weigh.
Pray now, sit down.
I had rather have one scratch myhead in the sun
when the alarum were struck
than idly sit to hear mynothings monstered.
Proceed, Cominius.
I shall lack voice.
The deeds of Coriolanus shouldnot be uttered feebly.
It is held that valor is thechiefest virtue
and most dignifies the haver.
If it be, the man I speak of
cannot in the world be singlycounterpoised.
At 16 years, when Tarquin made ahead for Rome,
he fought beyond the mark ofothers.
Our then dictator,
whom with all praise I point at,saw him fight,
when with his Amazonian chin
he drove the bristled lipsbefore him.
He bestrid an o'er-pressed Roman
and in the consul's view slewthree opposers.
Tarquin's self he met and struckhim on his knee.
In that day's feats,
when he might act the woman inthe scene,
he proved best man in the field,
and for his meed was brow-boundwith the oak.
His pupil age man-entered, thus,he waxed like a sea,
and in the brunt of 17 battlessince,
he lurched all swords of thegarland.
For this last,
before and in Corioli,
let me say, I cannot speak himhome.
He stopped the fliers
and, by his rare example,
made the coward turn terror intosport.
As weeds before a vessel undersail,
so men obeyed and fell below hisstem.
His sword, death's stamp whereit did mark, it took.
From face to foot, he was athing of blood
whose every motion was timedwith dying cries.
Alone he entered the mortal gateof the city,
which he painted with shunlessdestiny,
aidless came off
and with a sudden reinforcementstruck Corioli like a planet.
Now all's his.
When, by and by, the din of wargan pierce his ready sense,
then straight his doubledspirit,
re-quickened what in flesh wasfatigate,
and to the battle came he,
where he did run reeking overthe lives of men
as if 'twere a perpetual spoil.
And till we called both fieldand city ours,
he never stood to ease hisbreast with panting.
Worthy man.
He cannot but with measure fitthe honors
which we devise him.
Our spoils he kicked at andlooked upon things precious
as they were the common muck ofthe world.
He covets less than miseryitself would give,
rewards his deeds with doingthem,
and is content to spend the timeto end it.
He's right noble.
Let him be called for.
Call Coriolanus.
The senate, Coriolanus,
are well pleased to make theeconsul.
I do owe them still my life andservices.
It then remains that you dospeak to the people.
I do beseech you, let meo'erleap that custom,
for I cannot put on the gown,stand naked and entreat them
for my wounds' sake to givetheir suffrage.
Please you that I may pass thisdoing.
Sir, the people must have theirvoices,
neither will they bate one jotof ceremony.
Put them not to it.
Pray you, go fit you to thecustom and take to you,
as your predecessors have, yourhonor with your form.
It is apart that I shall blushin acting
and might well be taken from thepeople.
Mark you that?
To brag unto them, thus I did,and thus,
to show them the unaching scarswhich I should hide
as if I had received them
for the hire of their breathonly.
Do not stand upon it.
We recommend to you, tribunes ofthe people,
our purpose to them,
and to our noble consul wish weall joy and honor.
Once, if he do require ourvoices,
we ought not to deny him.
We may, sir, if we will.
We have power in ourselves to doit,
but it is a power that we haveno power to do,
for if he show us his wounds andtell us his deeds,
we are to put our tongues intothose wounds
and speak for them.
So if he tell us his nobledeeds,
we must also tell him our nobleacceptance of them.
Ingratitude is monstrous,
and for the multitude to beingrateful
were to make a monster of themultitude,
of the which we being members,
should bring ourselves to bemonstrous members.
And to make us no better thoughtof, a little help will serve,
for once we stood up about thecorn,
he himself stuck not to call usthe many-headed multitude.
We have been called so of many;
not that our head are somebrown, some black,
some auburn, some bald,
but that our wits are sodiversely colored.
And truly, I think,
if all our wits were to issueout of one skull,
they would fly east, west,north, south,
and their consent of one directway
should be at once to all thepoints of the compass.
Think you so?
Which way do you judge my witwould fly?
Nay, your wit will not so soonout as another man's will.
'Tis strongly wedged up in ablockhead,
but if it were at liberty,'twould, sure, southward.
Why that way?
To lose itself in a fog,
where being three parts meltedaway with rotten dews,
the fourth would return forconscience sake
to help to get thee a wife.
You are never without yourtricks.
O, you may, you may.
Are you all resolved to giveyour voices?
- No - Yes.
But that's no matter; thegreater part carries it.
I say, if he would incline tothe people,
there never was a worthier man.
Here he comes,
and in the gown of humility.
Mark his behavior.
We are not to stay all together
but to come by him where hestands,
by ones, by twos, by threes.
He's to make his requests byparticulars.
Have you not known the worthiestmen have done it?
What must I say?
"I pray, sir"ó
plague upon it.
I cannot bring my tongue to sucha pace.
"Look, sir, my wounds.
"I got them in my country'sservice,
"when some certain of yourbrethren
roared and ran from the noise ofour own drums."
O, me, the gods.
You must not speak of that.
You must desire them to thinkupon you.
Think upon me?
Hang them.
I would they would forget me,
like the virtues which ourdivines lose by them.
You'll mar all.
I'll leave you.
Pray you, speak to them, I prayyou, in wholesome manner.
Bid them wash their faces andkeep their teeth clean.
So here comes a brace.
You know the cause, sir, of mystanding here.
We do, sir.
Tell us what hath brought you toit.
Mine own desert.
Your own desert.
Ay, but not mine own desire.
How not your own desire?
No, sir, 'twas never my desire
yet to trouble the poor withbegging.
You must think, if we give youany thing,
we hope to gain by you.
Well, then, I pray, your priceof the consulship?
The price is to ask it kindly.
Kindly, sir.
I pray, let me have it.
I have wounds to show you,
which shall be yours in private.
Your good voice, sir.
What say you?
You shall have it, worthy sir.
A match, sir.
There's in all two worthy voicesbegged.
I have your alms.
Adieu.
But this is something odd.
An 'twere to give againó
'tis no matter.
Pray you now,
if it may stand with the tune ofyour voices
that I may be consul,
I have here the customary gown.
You have deserved nobly of yourcountry,
and you have not deserved nobly.
Your enigma?
You have been a scourge to herenemies;
you have been a rod to herfriends.
You have not indeed loved thecommon people.
You should account me the morevirtuous
that I have not been common inmy love.
I will, sir, flatter my swornbrother, the people,
to earn a dearer estimation ofthem.
'Tis a condition they accountgentle,
and since the wisdom of theirchoice
is rather to have my hat than myheart,
I will, sir, practice theinsinuating nod
and be off to them mostcounterfeitly.
That is, sir, I will counterfeit
the bewitchment of some popularman
and give it bountiful to thedesirers.
Therefore, beseech you, I may beconsul.
We hope to find you our friend
and therefore give you ourvoices heartily.
You have received many woundsfor your country.
I will not seal your knowledgewith showing them.
I will make much of your voices,and so trouble you no further.
The gods give you joy, sir,heartily.
Most sweet voices.
Better it is to die,
better to starve,
than crave the hire which firstwe do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge shouldI stand here
to beg of Hob and Dick,
that does appear, their needlessvouches?
Custom calls me to it.
What custom wills, in all thingsshould we do it,
the dust on antique time wouldlie unswept
and mountainous error be toohighly heapt
for truth to over-peer.
Rather than fool it so,
let the high office and thehonor
go to one that would do thus.
I am half through.
The one part suffered; the otherwill I do.
Here come more voices.
Your voices.
For your voices, I have fought,
watched for your voices,
for your voices bear of woundstwo dozen odd,
battles thrice six I have seenand heard of,
for your voices have done manythings,
some less, some more;
your voices.
Indeed, I would be consul.
He has done nobly
and cannot go without any honestman's voice.
Therefore, let him be consul.
Amen.
God save thee, noble consul.
Worthy voices.
You have stood your limitation,
and the tribunes endue you withthe people's voice.
Remains that, in the officialmarks invested,
you anon do meet the senate.
Is this done?
The custom of request you havedischarged.
The people do admit you and aresummoned to meet anon
upon your approbation.
Where, at the senate house?
- There, Coriolanus. - May Ichange these garments?
You may, sir.
That I'll straight do, and,knowing myself again,
repair to the senate house.
I'll keep you company.
He has it now,
and by his looks, methinks 'tiswarm at his heart.
With a proud heart he wore hishumble weeds.
Will you dismiss the people?
How now, my masters?
Have you chose this man?
He has our voices, sir.
To my poor unworthy notice,
he mocked us when he begged ourvoices.
Certainly, he flouted usdownright.
No, 'tis his kind of speech.
He did not mock us.
Not one amongst us, saveyourself,
but says he used us scornfully.
He should have showed us hismarks of merit,
wounds received for his country.
Why, so he did, I'm sure.
No, no;
no man saw them.
He said he had wounds, which hecould show in private.
And with his hat, thus waving itin scorn,
"I would be consul," says he.
"Aged custom, but by yourvoices,
"will not so permit me.
Your voices therefore."
When we granted that, here was,
"I thank you for your voices.
"Thank you for your most sweetvoices.
Now you have left your voices, Ihave no further with you."
Was not this mockery?
Why either were you ignorant tosee it, or, seeing it,
of such childish friendliness toyield your voices?
Did you perceive he did solicityou in free contempt
when he did need your loves,
and do you think that hiscontempt
shall not be bruising to you,
when he hath power to crush?
Why had your bodies no heartamong you?
Or had you tongues to cry
against the rectorship ofjudgment?
Have you ere now denied theasker?
And now again of him that didnot ask but mock,
bestow your sued-for tongues?
He's not confirmed.
We may deny him yet.
And will deny him.
I'll have 500 voices of thatsound.
Let them assemble, and on asafer judgment,
all revoke your ignorantelection.